---
permalink: install-an-ssl-certificate/
audit_date: '2018-10-23'
title: Install an SSL certificate
type: article
created_date: '2018-10-23'
created_by: Cat Lookabaugh
last_modified_date: '2018-10-23'
last_modified_by: Cat Lookabaugh
product: Cloud Servers
product_url: cloud-servers
---

After you [generate a certificate signing request (CSR)](/how-to/generate-a-csr)
and [purchase or renew a Secure Socket Layer (SSL certificate](https://support.rackspace.com/how-to/purchase-or-renew-an-ssl-certificate/),
you'll need to install it. This article shows how to install an SSL certificate on
various servers and operating systems. The following sections provide
instructions for the installation process:

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)

- [Install certificate on Microsoft&reg; Windows&reg; 2008 R2 and 2012 servers](#install-certificate-on-windows-servers)

- [Install certificate on Linux&reg; server with Apache&reg;](#install-certificate-on-linux-server-with-apache)

- [Install certificate on Linux server with Nginx&reg;](#install-certificate-on-linux-server-with-nginx)

- [Install certificate on Managed Hosting solutions](#install-certificate-on-managed-hosting-solutions)

- [Install certificate on a custom Azure domain](#install-certificate-on-a-custom-azure-domain)

- [Reload or restart the webserver service](#reload-or-restart-the-webserver)

- [Test the certificate](#test-the-certificate)

After you have installed your certificate, you should reload your webserver
service.

### Prerequisites

Before installing your certificate, make sure you have the following items:

- A certificate from your preferred SSL vendor stored on your server. If you
don't already have a certificate, see
[Generate a CSR](https://support.rackspace.com/how-to/generate-a-csr/) and
[Purchase or renew an SSL certificate](https://support.rackspace.com/how-to/purchase-or-renew-an-ssl-certificate/)
for instructions.
- The CA bundle with the root and intermediate certificates, provided by the SSL
vendor.
- The **.key** file that was generated when you created the Certificate Signing
Request (CSR).
- A webserver such as Apache and ``mod_ssl`` should be installed.
- You also need to have an Internet Protocol (IP) address for your SSL certificate.

#### Copy the files into the default location on your server

A vendor-provided SSL certificate contains three components: the SSL certificate,
the certificate authority (CA) file, and the SSL key. When you receive your SSL
certificate from your authority, upload it to your server by using the following
steps.

1. Copy all the contents of the certificate, including the `BEGIN CERTIFICATE`
and `END CERTIFICATE` lines. Save the copied text as `domain.com.crt`.

2. Copy the certificate and private key into the appropriate server directory
in which you plan to store your certs (For example, the default Apache
directories are: `/usr/local/apache/conf/ssl.crt/` or
`/etc/httpd/conf/ssl.crt/`).

### Install certificate on Windows servers

The following sub-sections show how to install and bind an SSL certificate on
Windows servers by using the Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager.  The
final sub-section provides the steps

#### Install the certificate

Prerequisite: You should already have the certificate provided by your
preferred SSL vendor.

If you got CSR using anything other than IIS, skip to
[Import an SSL certificate from another server](#import-an-ssl-certificate-from-another-server).

Use the following steps if you got your CSR by using IIS, which pairs the public
key from your vendor with the private key generated by IIS.

1. In the IIS Manager, select the server and double-click **Server Certificates**.
2. Under **Actions**, click **Complete Certificate Request**.
3. In the wizard, select the location of the certificate file, provided by your
SSL vendor.
4. For *Windows Server 2012 only*, name the file and choose your store.
5. Click **OK**.

#### Import an SSL certificate from another server

1. In the IIS Manager, double-click **Server Certificates**.
2. Under **Actions**, click **Import**.
3. Select the location of your certificate file, enter the password (if you set
one), and choose your certificate store (*Windows Server 2012 only*). Then,
click **OK**.

#### Set up the bindings

1. In the IIS Manager, right-click your site and select **Edit Bindings**.
2. In the **Site Bindings** window, click **Add**.
3. In the **Add Site Binding** dialog box, perform the following steps:
    1. Set the value of **Type** to **https**.
    2. For *Windows Server 2012 only*, specify the host name, if necessary.
    3. From the **SSL certificate** list, select your certificate.
    4. Click **OK**.

After the binding is set up, the **Site Bindings** window shows the binding for
HTTPS.

### Install certificate on Linux server with Apache

The following subsections show how to save your certificate on a Linux server
and configure Apache to use the certificate, modify the IP tables, and verify
the settings.  After you have installed the certificate,
[reload or restart the webserver](#reload-or-restart-the-webserver).

#### Save the certificate and key file

Save the certificate provided by the SSL vendor and the **.key** file that you
generated when your created the CSR in the appropriate directories.  We
recommend the following directories:

**RPM-based distros**

- **Certificates and CA-certificates**: `/etc/pki/tls/certs/domain.com.crt or domain.com.ca-crt`
- **Keys**: `/etc/pki/tls/private/domain.com.key`

**OpenSSL (or Debian)**

- **Certificates**: `/etc/ssl/certs/ssl.crt`
- **Keys**: `/etc/ssl/private/ssl.key`

#### Configure httpd.conf

Open the Apache **httpd.conf** file in a text editor, and add the following
lines for the ``VirtualHost``, changing the IP address and the paths to the
certificate files to reflect the location of your certificate:

    <VirtualHost 123.45.67.89:443>
    ServerName www.domain.com
    DocumentRoot /path/to/your/document/root/htdocs

    SSLEngine ON
    SSLCertificateFile /etc/httpd/conf/ssl.crt/domain.com.crt
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/httpd/conf/ssl.key/domain.com.key

    ErrorLog logs/ssl.domain.com.error_log
    CustomLog logs/ssl.domain.com.access_log combined
    </VirtualHost>

Save the changes and exit the editor.

**Note**: If you want all the IP address’s on the public interface to utilize
the virtual host, you can put `<VirtualHost *:443>` in the configuration instead
of specifying a specific IP address.

#### iptables

You might need to open a port in your firewall to allow SSL connections to
port ``443``.  To verify, get a list of your firewall rules by running the
following command:

    sudo /sbin/iptables -L

If you have iptables active but without exceptions for port ``443``, you'll
need to add some, as shown the following sample:

    sudo /sbin/iptables -I INPUT -p tcp --dport 443 -m state --state NEW,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
    sudo /sbin/iptables -I OUTPUT -p tcp --sport 443 -m state --state ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT

Remember to add the rules to your iptables config file or run the following code
on Red Hat-based distributions:

    sudo /sbin/service iptables save

#### Verify configuration syntax

Use the following commands to verify your configuration for various operating
systems:

**Most distros**:

To verify the configuration file syntax, run the following command ensuring that
you have no spelling errors and haven't added the wrong filenames:

    # apachectl -t

If the file is good, the command returns ``Syntax OK``. If there are errors,
the command returns the incorrect lines.

**RPM-based distros**:

To verify the configuration file syntax, run the following command ensuring that
you have no spelling errors and haven't added the wrong filenames:

    # httpd -t

If the file is good, the command returns ``Syntax OK``. If there are errors,
the command returns the incorrect lines.

**Debian-based distros**:

To verify the configuration file syntax, run the following command ensuring that
you have no spelling errors and haven't added the wrong filenames:

    # apache2 -t

If the file is good, the command returns ``Syntax OK``. If there are errors,
the command returns the incorrect lines.

#### Install certificate on Linux server with Nginx

The following subsections show how to save your certificate on a Linux server
with Nginx and configure the virtual hosts file.  After you have installed the
certificate, [reload or restart the webserver](#reload-or-restart-the-webserver).

#### Save the certificates and key file

Save to your server the primary and intermediate certificates, which should be
in the **domain_name.pem** file that you received from the SSL vendor, and the
**.key** file that you generated when your created the CSR.

If you don't already have a certificate bundle file, combine the primary
certificate (for example, my_domain.crt) and the intermediate certificate
(for example, intermediate.crt) into a single file by running the following
command:

    cat my_domain.crt intermediate.crt >> bundle.crt

#### Configure the Nginx virtual hosts file

Use the following instructions to edit the Nginx virtual hosts file:

1. Edit the Nginx virtual host file on your server.

2. Copy the existing, non-secure server module (from `server {` through the
closing `}`) and paste the code immediately below the server module.

3. In the pasted section add the following lines between `server {` and the
`server name` line:

    listen   443;

    ssl    on;
    ssl_certificate    /etc/ssl/your_domain_name.pem; (or bundle.crt)
    ssl_certificate_key    /etc/ssl/your_domain_name.key;

4. Make sure that the **ssl_certificate** file matches your bundle file and
that the **ssl_certificate_key** file matches your key file.

### Install certificate on Managed Hosting solutions

If you have requested an SSL certificate for your Rackspace Managed Hosting
server by submitted a Rackspace ticket, Rackspace will install the certificate
for you.  You should provide details including where you want the certificate
installed and your private key file.

### Install certificate on a custom Azure domain

By default, Azure secures the **.azurewebsites.net** wildcard domain with a
single SSL certificate, so you can already access your application by using the
**https://\<appname>.azurewebsites.net** URL.

However, the default Azure SSL certificate does not work if you use a custom
domain for your application. A custom domain with its own SSL certificate is
more secure than the default. The following subsections describe how to add an
SSL certificate to a application with a custom domain.

#### Prerequisite

- Your login credentials for the Azure portal. For information about how to log
in to the Azure portal, see
[Sitecore Cloud portals and account management](/how-to/sitecore-cloud-portals-and-account-management/).

#### Get an SSL certificate

If you do not already have SSL certificate, you need to get one from a trusted
certificate authority (CA). The certificate must meet all the following
requirements:

- Signed by a trusted CA (no private CA servers).

- Contain a private key.

- Created for key exchange, and exported to a .PFX file.

- Use a minimum of 2048-bit encryption.

- Have a subject name that matches the custom domain it needs to secure. To
secure multiple domains with one certificate, you need to use a wildcard name
(for example, *.contoso.com*) or specify subjectAltName values.

- Merged with all intermediate certificates used by your CA. Otherwise, you
might experience irreproducible interoperability problems on some clients.

For more information on getting a certificate, see
[generate a certificate signing request (CSR)](/how-to/generate-a-csr)
and [purchase or renew a Secure Socket Layer (SSL certificate](https://support.rackspace.com/how-to/purchase-or-renew-an-ssl-certificate/).

#### Add the SSL certificate to Azure

1. Log in to the [Azure portal](https://portal.azure.com).

2. In the left side navigation pane, click **App services**.

3. Select the application to which you want to assign the certificate.

4. Navigate to **Settings** and then click **SSL certificate**.

5. Click **Upload Certificate**.

6. Select the **.pfx** file that contains your SSL certificate and enter the
password that you want to use for this certification.

7. Click **Upload**.

   You can now navigate to the SSL certificate through the application pane.

8. In the "SSL bindings" section of the SSL certificate pane, click **Add bindings**.

   A new pane labeled *SSL Bindings* appears.

9. Use the drop-down menus to select the custom domain URL you want to secure
by using SSL, followed by the name of SSL certificate. You can also select
whether to use **Server Name Indication (SNI) SSL** or **IP-based SSL**.

10. Click **Add binding**.

    SSL is now enabled for your custom domain.

### Reload or restart the webserver

After you have installed the SSL certificate, you should reload the webserver
service.  This section describes the steps to restart Apache and Nginx.

When you are making changes to Apache, you have two different options for your
changes to work: to restart the service or to reload the service. A restart
should be necessary only if you are adding or removing modules (such as
the ``sslL_module``). Because restarting a service takes some time to come back
up, we recommend that you use the reload option.

#### Reload Apache

To reload Apache, run the following command:

**CentOS 7.x and later**

    # systemctl reload httpd

**CentOS 6.x and earlier**

    # service httpd reload

**Ubuntu**

    # /etc/init.d/apache2 reload

#### Restart Apache

To restart your Apache web server, run the following command:

    # /etc/init.d/httpd restart
    or
    # /etc/init.d/apache2 restart

#### Restart Nginx

To restart Nginx, run the following command:

        sudo /etc/init.d/nginx restart

### Test the certificate

The best way to test a certificate is to use a 3rd-party tool like the
[SSLLabs scanner](https://www.ssllabs.com/ssltest/). If you need assistance in
improving the security configuration of your certificate, contact Rackspace.

**Note**: If you browse to your website by using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Secure (HTTPS) protocol directive, the padlock icon on your browser is displayed
in the locked position if your certificates are installed correctly and the server
is properly configured for SSL.

Another way to test the certificate is to go to `whynopadlock.com`.  Enter your
url in **Secure Address**, and it shows any discrepancies that could cause the
site to be unsecure, such as mixed content issues.
