---
permalink: systems-management-simplified-in-the-cloud/
audit_date:
title: Systems Management, Simplified in the Cloud
type: article
created_date: '2012-07-27'
created_by: Rackspace Support
last_modified_date: '2012-08-01'
last_modified_by: Rackspace Support
product: Cloud Servers
product_url: cloud-servers
---

[<img src="{% asset_path cloud-servers/systems-management-simplified-in-the-cloud/scalextreme.png %}" alt="scalextreme" id="__mce_tmp" width="395" height="129" />](http://www.scalextreme.com/)

**ScaleXtreme seamlessly transitions to the open cloud with Rackspace.**

**CUSTOMER'S BUSINESS:** ScaleXtreme offers systems monitoring and
management software that allows customers to view all of their servers
through a single unified interface.

**CHALLENGES:** The company was seeking a simple solution for both
enterprise customers and those new to the cloud; they also sought a
stable and scalable platform for their own testing and development.

**RACKSPACE SOLUTION:** [Rackspace&reg; Cloud
Servers](http://www.rackspace.com/cloud/cloud_hosting_products/servers/)
powered by [OpenStack&reg;](http://www.openstack.org/)

**BUSINESS OUTCOME:** The company's transition to next generation Cloud
Servers was completely seamless, involving no coding.

[**<span style="color: #b01b36;">CLICK HERE TO DOWNLOAD CASE
STUDY.</span>**](http://c179631.r31.cf0.rackcdn.com/ScaleXtreme.pdf)




[Video
Platform](http://corp.kaltura.com/products/video-platform-features)
[Video
Management](http://corp.kaltura.com/Products/Features/Video-Management)
[Video Solutions](http://corp.kaltura.com/Video-Solutions) [Video
Player](http://corp.kaltura.com/Products/Features/Video-Player)
[](http://cdnbakmi.kaltura.com/p/941731/sp/94173100/thumbnail/entry_id/1_nmle4kxo/width/120/height/90/bgcolor/000000/type/2)
<span property="dc:description" content=""></span><span
property="media:title" content="ScaleXtremeFinalWEB"></span> <span
property="media:width" content="704"></span><span
property="media:height" content="396"></span> <span
property="media:type" content="application/x-shockwave-flash"></span>




### COMPANY OVERVIEW

Based in San Mateo, Calif., ScaleXtreme offers systems monitoring and
management software that allows companies to view both internal and
cloud-based servers and systems through a single pane of glass. In
addition to this federated view, the application allows customers to
monitor their servers, automate jobs across multiple systems, patch and
update Windows and Linux systems, and control spending on servers.

A Rackspace Cloud Tools partner, the company was an early adopter of
Rackspace next generation Cloud Servers powered by OpenStack&reg;. In
upholding its motto, "Simplicity, scalability, and sociability,"
ScaleXtreme has found the next-generation servers to be a perfect
complement to their own offerings, requiring no coding to adopt and
offering a range of improvements.

### EARLY ADOPTION

An early adopter of the next-gen servers, ScaleXtreme's developers and
engineers were immediately impressed. CEO Nand Mulchandani says, "We
started working with the Rackspace technical team very early on, when
they had very early versions of it. One of the things we found right
away is that it's completely standards-compliant. We actually didn't
need to make any changes to Open-Stack APIs or providers to work
seamlessly with Rackspace."

This is an atypical experience for the ScaleXtreme team. Because
ScaleXtreme's application allows customers to monitor servers hosted by
a variety of cloud providers, its engineers generally have their hands
full whenever a new provider or product comes along. "For a new
proprietary provider, who has proprietary APIs and interface, it
literally takes us months of engineering time to have our two systems
talk together," Mulchandani says.

By contrast, Mulchandani says, "Working with the new Rackspace system
has been easy. Because the new Rackspace systems are all based on the
OpenStack standard, and because ScaleXtreme was supporting OpenStack
from the very beginning, making the two systems talk to each other was a
matter of simply pointing at the new APIs and the new standard system
and just testing it. Everything just worked, right out of the box. It
was so easy to do that it was basically a non-event for us."

### SIMPLICITY AND SPEED

In addition to its out-of-the-box compatibility, the next-generation
servers' new interface impressed Mulchandani. "The UI itself is much
richer," he says, "much simpler, and a lot faster. I think customers
will find it to be a completely new experience, although they're not
going to have to go through any learning curves around the core
functionality itself."

This ease-of-use has led Mulchandani to recommend Rackspace to
cloud-computing newbies. "One of the things we highly recommend to
customers is that, of all the cloud computing systems out there, we've
found that Rackspace is one of the easiest to use, and the most
approachable one to get into," he says. "The combination of Rackspace
with ScaleXtreme is probably the easiest and simplest way to get into
cloud computing."

Though simple enough for newcomers to cloud computing, Rackspace is
stable and scalable enough for the enterprises ScaleXtreme also serves,
and the company itself relies on Rackspace. "All of our test and
development at ScaleXtreme runs on Rackspace, because of the scalability
and the predictability of the platform," says Mulchandani. "That's been
a very big win for us."

Director of Engineering Karthik Ram echoes Mulchandani's praise. "We're
impressed with the speed and performance of Rackspace next-gen Cloud
Servers," he says. "The API is remarkably reliable and we can be
comfortable with its stability thanks to its OpenStack heritage."

The constant availability of support also puts the ScaleXtreme team at
ease, though they've rarely had to take advantage of it. "[Fanatical
Support&reg;](http://www.rackspace.com/whyrackspace/support/) is
definitely there," Mulchandani says. "We actually haven't had to call
Rackspace support very often, as it's been an extremely stable platform,
very open."

### AN OPEN CLOUD

Mulchandani feels that Rackspace's use of a nonproprietary
infrastructure fulfills the original promise of cloud computing. "The
promise of the cloud is to get away from a locked-down, proprietary
system, and for systems of data to move freely," he says. "A major
platform vendor like Rackspace adopting OpenStack has enabled an
ecosystem of partners and tools and products to grow around it, so that
there's a high level of interoperability. Customers can feel
comfortable, because all of a sudden now there isn't this onerous
lock-in that cloud computing was supposed to get rid of in the first
place."

Ram agrees, saying, "This may be one of the first
infrastructure-as-a-service offerings to take full advantage of the
power of open standards, and we're excited to be using it."

ScaleXtreme's enthusiasm for Rackspace shows no signs of waning.
"Working with the team has been fantastic," Mulchandani says, "from the
marketing teams, to the system development teams, to the solution
partner programs. It's been an absolutely great experience."

The company's relationship with Rackspace continues with a place in
Rackspace's Marketplace, where ScaleXtreme offers a systems-management
application that supports both generations of Rackspace servers.
According to Mulchandani, "Within minutes, you can be managing your
systems and discovering new things about what you can do with the new
Cloud Servers you'll be launching at Rackspace."
