---
permalink: understanding-logrotate-utility/
audit_date:
title: Understanding logrotate utility
type: article
created_date: '2011-11-23'
created_by: Jered Heeschen
last_modified_date: '2016-01-06'
last_modified_by: Stephanie Fillmon
product: Cloud Servers
product_url: cloud-servers
---

### What is logrotate?

It may surprise you to learn that logrotate is a program used to rotate
logs. It's true! The system usually runs logrotate once a day, and when
it runs it checks rules that can be customized on a per-directory or
per-log basis.

"Log rotation" refers to the practice of archiving an application's
current log, starting a fresh log, and deleting older logs. And while
we're explaining things, a "log" is a file where an application stores
information that might be useful to an administrator or developer - what
it's been doing, what errors it's run into, that sort of thing. So logs
are good, you just usually don't want to keep a ton of them around.
That's where logrotate comes in.

### The importance of log rotation

Logs are wonderful things when you want to track usage or troubleshoot
an application. Unfortunately the more information that gets logged, the
more disk space the log uses. Over time it can really add up.

A log left unrotated can grow to a pretty unwieldy size. Running out of
disk space because of a giant log is a problem of course, but a huge log
file can also slow down the process of resizing or backing up your
virtual server. Another practical consideration is that it's hard to
look for a particular event if you have a million log entries to skim
through. So on the whole it's a good idea to keep log files down to a
manageable size, and to prune them when they get too old to be of much
use.

Fortunately logrotate makes log rotation easy.

### How it works

The system runs logrotate on a schedule, usually daily. In fact, on most
distributions you'll find the script that runs logrotate daily at:

    /etc/cron.daily/logrotate

Some distributions use a variation on that theme. For example, on Gentoo
the logrotate script is:

    /etc/cron.daily/logrotate.cron

If you want logrotate to run more often (for hourly log rotation, for
example) you'll need to look into using cron to run logrotate through a
script in /etc/cron.hourly.

When logrotate runs it reads its configuration files to determine where
to find the log files it needs to rotate, and to check on details like
how often the files should be rotated and how many archived logs to
keep.

### logrotate.conf

The main logrotate configuration file is located at:

    /etc/logrotate.conf

If you look inside that file you'll see the default parameters logrotate
uses when it rotates logs. The file is nicely commented, so skim it to
see how things are set up. We'll talk about several of the specific
commands in that file shortly.

Note that one line reads:

    include /etc/logrotate.d

That's where we'll find most of the application-specific configuration
files.

### logrotate.d

Take a look inside the directory where you'll store application-specific
log settings:

    ls /etc/logrotate.d

Depending on how much you've installed on your server there may be no
files in this directory, or there may be several. In general,
applications that are installed through your package manager will also
create a config file in /etc/logrotate.d.

Most likely you will at least see a config file for your syslog service,
which logrotate will read when it goes to rotate the system logs. If you
look inside you'll see an entry for various system logs along with some
commands similar to what you saw in logrotate.conf.

**NOTE:** You won't actually see an entry for a syslog service on
versions of Ubuntu older than Karmic Koala (9.10). Prior to that release
the system logs were rotated by a "savelog" command run from the
"/etc/cron.daily/sysklogd" script.

#### Inside an application file

As an example, let's take a look at the contents of a logrotate config
file that might be put in place when you install apache on a Fedora
system:

    /var/log/httpd/*log {
        missingok
        notifempty
        sharedscripts
        postrotate
            /sbin/service httpd reload > /dev/null 2>/dev/null || true
        endscript
    }

We'll look at what most of the specific directives in this file mean in
a bit, but the short version is that when logrotate runs it will check
for any files in /var/log/httpd that end in "log" and rotate them, so
long as they aren't empty. If it checks the httpd directory and doesn't
find any logfiles it won't throw an error. Then it will run the command
in the "postrotate/endscript" block (in this case, a command that will
tell apache to restart), but only after it's processed all the specified
logs.

What you don't see in that file are some settings you saw back in
logrotate.conf. This is because the commands in logrotate.conf act as
defaults for log rotation. You can specify different settings for any
application where you want to override the defaults. For example, if you
run a busy web server, you may want to include a "daily" command in
apache's config block so apache's logs will rotate daily instead of the
default weekly rotation.

That might be more clear if we talk about what some of the more
commonly-used commands actually do in a logrotate config file. So let's
do that next.

### Configuration commands

You can get a full list of commands used in logrotate configuration
files by checking the man page:

    man logrotate

We'll go over more commonly-used commands here.

Remember, the config files for applications in /etc/logrotate.d inherit
their defaults from the main /etc/logrotate.conf file.

#### Log files

A log file and its rotation behavior is defined by listing the log file
(or files) followed by curly brackets. Most application configuration
files will contain just one of these blocks, but it's possible to put
more than one in a file, or to add log file blocks to the main
logrotate.conf file.

You can list more than one log file for a block either by using a
wildcard in the name or by separating log files in the list with spaces.
For example, to specify all files in the directory /var/foo that end in
".log", as well as the file "/var/bar/log.txt", you would set up the
block like so:

    /var/foo/*.log /var/bar/log.txt {
            blah blah blah
            blah blah blah redux
    }

Just not with as many blahs.

#### Rotate count

The "rotate" command determines how many archived logs will be kept
around before logrotate starts deleting the older ones. For example:

    rotate 4

That command tells logrotate to keep 4 archived logs at a time. If there
are already four archived logs when the log is rotated again, the oldest
one (the one with ".4" at the end, usually) will be deleted to make room
for the new archive.

#### Rotation interval

You can specify a command that will tell logrotate how often to rotate a
particular log. The possible commands include:

    daily
    weekly
    monthly
    yearly

If a rotation interval is not specified the log will be rotated whenever
logrotate runs (unless another condition like "size" has been set).

If you want to use a time interval other than the keywords listed here
you'll have to get clever with cron and a separate config file. For
example, if you wanted to rotate a particular log file hourly, you could
create a file in "/etc/cron.hourly" (you may need to create that
directory too) that would contain a line like:

    /usr/sbin/logrotate /etc/logrotate.hourly.conf

Then put the configuration for that hourly run of logrotate (the log
file location, whether or not to compress old files, and so on) into
"/etc/logrotate.hourly.conf".

#### Size

You can specify a file size that logrotate will check when determining
whether or not to perform a rotation by using the "size" command. The
format of the command tells logrotate what units you're using to specify
the size:

    size 100k
    size 100M
    size 100G

The first example would rotate the log if it gets larger than 100
kilobytes, the second if it's larger than 100 megabytes, and the third
if it's over 100 gigabytes. I don't recommend using a limit of 100G,
mind you, the example just got a little out of hand there.

The size command takes priority over and replaces a rotation interval if
both are set.

#### Compression

If you want archived logfiles to be compressed (in gzip format) you can
include the following command, usually in /etc/logrotate.conf:

    compress

This is normally a good idea, since log files are usually all text, and
text compresses very well. You might, however, have some archived logs
you don't want compressed, but still want compression to be on by
default. In those cases you can include the following command in an
application-specific config:

    nocompress

One more command of note in regard to compression is:

    delaycompress

This command can be useful if you want the archived logs to be
compressed, but not right away. With "delaycompress" active an archived
log won't be compressed until the next time the log is rotated. This can
be important when you have a program that might still write to its old
logfile for a time after a fresh one is rotated in. Note that
"delaycompress" only works if you also have "compress" in your config.

An example of a good time to use delaycompress would be when logrotate
is told to restart apache with the "graceful" or "reload" directive.
Since old apache processes would not be killed until their connections
are finished, they could potentially try to log more items to the old
file for some time after the restart. Delaying the compression ensures
that you won't lose those extra log entries when the logs are rotated.

#### Postrotate

The "postrotate" script is run by logrotate each time it rotates a log
specified in a config block. You'll usually want to use this to restart
an application after the log rotation so the app can switch to a new
log.

    postrotate
        /usr/sbin/apachectl restart > /dev/null
    endscript

That "&gt; /dev/null" bit at the end tells logrotate to pipe the
command's output to, well, nowhere. Otherwise the output of that command
will be sent off to the console or the log or email or whatever, and in
this case, you don't really care about the output if everything
restarted okay.

The "postrotate" command tells logrotate that the script to run will
start on the next line, and the "endscript" command says that the script
is done.

#### Sharedscripts

Normally logrotate will run the "postrotate" script every time it
rotates a log. This is true for multiple logs using the same config
block. So for example, a web server config block that refers to both the
access log and the error log will, if it rotates both, run the
"postrotate" script twice (once for each file rotated). So if both files
are rotated, the web server will be restarted twice.

To keep logrotate from running that script for every log, you can
include the command:

    sharedscripts

That tells logrotate to wait until it's checked all the logs for that
config block before running the postrotate script. If one or both of the
logs get rotated, the postrotate script still only gets run once. If
none of the logs get rotated, the postrotate script won't run at all.

### Where to go next

You've seen an overview of what logrotate does and what kind of
configuration options are available to you. You should be all set to go
poking around in the existing configs and adapt them to your needs. To
learn how to put an example config together (to rotate the logs for
custom virtual hosts),and also cover some handy troubleshooting
approaches, see [Sample logrotate configurations and
troubleshooting](/how-to/sample-logrotate-configuration-and-troubleshooting).

